# The impact of customer service chatbots on e-commerce

## What is a chatbot?

A chatbot is a computer software program which combines natural language
processing, understanding and generation (NLP, NLU & NLG), artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) algorithms to simulate a
human-like behaviour. It can respond to questions and hold a
conversation. This type of technology is what is called human-computer
interaction (HCI). \[1\] Chatbots are used in a verity of sectors. Some
examples are education, health and of course e-commerce.

The definition given by the dictionary goes as follows: "A computer
program designed to simulate conversation with human users, especially
over the Internet" (Chatbot \|Definition of chatbot in English by Lexico
Dictionaries, 2019)

Multiple types chatbots exist, going from text based to voice based to a
combination of both. \[6\] Below is a more detailed taxonomy about
chatbots.


### Taxonomy of a chatbot

There are many variants of chatbots such as digital assistants,
artificial conversation entities, interactive agents and smart bots
\[1\]. In this research, the focus will be on the interactive agents,
due to the fact that most e-commerce chatbots are interactive agents.

These chatbots can be further divided into different categories.
Depending on which aspect you want to categorise, many options are
available. Some of them are listed below.

##### Architecture

This categorisation is based on the way the chatbots are constructed,
their internal architecture. Rule based chatbots use already developed
or newly handcrafted algorithms as a decision maker to identify both
knowledge and response. On the other hand, AI based chatbots are
chatbots that use machine learning (ML) algorithms to generate a
response based on the data provided. They keep on learning and improving
based on the previous learning models. \[2\]

##### Domain

A second categorisation is based on how broad the domain is in which
they are used. Domain specific chatbots focus on specific industries.
They have knowledge of the industry they are deployed in. On the other
hand, general domain chatbots are created to support conversations in
open topics. They don't support a specific domain. Instead, they are
versatile and may be applied to any discipline. \[2\]

##### Platform

A third categorisation divides chatbots based on the platform they are
active on. Social media chatbots use platforms such as Facebook
Messenger, Facebook WhatsApp or Telegram Messenger for their
communication with the user. Web based chatbots are most common on
websites of companies. There, they get their own chat box to serve
clients that way. Standalone program chatbots are installed as a
separate program on the device of the user. \[2\]

##### Type

A fourth categorisation is based on the type of chatbot. Goal-based
chatbots have a set goal they want to get to. Knowledge-based chatbots
are classified on the knowledge they possess. Service-based chatbots are
divided on the services they provide to the customer. Response-generated
based chatbots are classified based on what action it performs in
response generation. \[3\]

##### Task

A final categorisation is based on whether they have a task to complete
or not. This results in task- and non-task-oriented chatbots. The latter
is more question oriented and the first one more conversational. \[3\]

Some example e-commerce chatbots

-   Billie by Bol.com

-   StyleBot by Nike

-   WineBot by Lidl

-   Domino's AnyWare by Domino's Pizza

## Key Attributes and components of a successful e-commerce chatbot.

Previous research has pointed out which characteristics are the most
important. These characteristics can be grouped into some key
dimensions.

##### Functionality

The most important attributes are interpretation of requests, execution
of the request, flexible interpretation, ability to maintain a
discussion, activation and the number of services available. \[4\]

##### Trustworthiness

Trustworthiness handles about the chatbot containing dependable
information, containing a wide range of knowledge, the possibility of
rating the chatbot, robustness to unexpected input and transparency.
\[4\]

##### Safety/Intrusion

This category is all about protection and the respect of privacy and
making sure the user is safe from intrusion. \[4\]

##### Efficiency

The efficiency dimension specifies the ease of use, quick replies versus
free text usage, availability, accessibility and the need for an
account. \[4\]

##### Graphical Appearance

Graphical Appearance is all about the design and feel of the user
interface and the use of emojis and gifs in conversations. \[4\]

##### Humanity

The humanity dimension shows how humanlike the chatbot is. The
attributes are about how real the chatbot feels, if it creates and
enjoyable interaction, if it can convey a personality and if it can read
and respond to certain moods of the customer. \[4\]

##### Empathy

Empathy is about personalised options and suggestions. \[4\]

##### Responsiveness

Responsiveness specifies the productivity and how fast the chatbot
responds. \[4\]

By putting these attributes through Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), 7
main dimensions are found. AHP is a structured approach for navigating
complex decision-making processes that involve both qualitative and
quantitative considerations. \[6\] Table 1 lists the plausible
attributes that give the highest user satisfaction score. \[4\]

![Table Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png)

*Table 1: Plausible quality attributes of Chatbot. \[4\]*

These attributes can be brought under six quality assessment categories
provided by the ISO 9126-1 quality model[^1] as seen in Table 2. By
doing so, the quality of any piece of software, including a chatbot, can
be measured. \[4\]

Depending on the goal you want to reach, the focus on the most important
characteristics will shift. \[6\]

Overall, accessibility and efficiency come out to be the most important
dimensions of a chatbot. \[6\]

![Table Description automatically
generated](media/image2.png)

*Table 2: the ISO/IEC 9126-1 internal/external quality model \[5\]*

---
## Sources

\[1\] Adamopoulou, E., & Moussiades, L. (2020). Chatbots: History,
technology, and applications. *Machine Learning with Applications*, *2*,
100006. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mlwa.2020.100006>

\[2\] Maroengsit, W., Piyakulpinyo, T., Phonyiam, K., Pongnumkul, S.,
Chaovalit, P., & Theeramunkong, T. (2019). A survey on evaluation
methods for chatbots. *PervasiveHealth: Pervasive Computing Technologies
for Healthcare*, *Part F148391*, 111--119.
<https://doi.org/10.1145/3323771.3323824>

\[3\] Nuruzzaman, M., & Hussain, O. K. (2018). A Survey on Chatbot
Implementation in Customer Service Industry through Deep Neural
Networks. *Proceedings - 2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on
e-Business Engineering, ICEBE 2018*, 54--61.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEBE.2018.00019>

\[4\] Muizzah Johari, N., & Nohuddin, P. N. (2021). Quality Attributes
for a Good Chatbot: A Literature Review. *International Journal of
Electrical Engineering and Technology (IJEET)*, *12*(7), 109--119.
<https://doi.org/10.34218/IJEET.12.7.2021.012>

\[5\] Botella, P., Burgués, X., Carvallo, J. P., Franch, X., Grau, G.,
Marco, J., & Quer, C. (n.d.). *ISO/IEC 9126 in practice: what do we need
to know?* Retrieved November 12, 2021, from
[https://www.essi.upc.edu/\~webgessi/publicacions/SMEF'04-ISO-QualityModels.pdf](https://www.essi.upc.edu/~webgessi/publicacions/SMEF’04-ISO-QualityModels.pdf)

\[6\] Radziwill, N., & Benton, M. (n.d.). *Evaluating Quality of
Chatbots and Intelligent Conversational Agents*.
<http://www.masswerk.at/elizabot/eliza.html>

[^1]: <https://www.iso.org/standard/22749.html>
